update import of terms documentation (#7492)
monarch-initiative/mondo: docs/editors-guide/import-terms-for-logical-axioms.md

_Last updated 27-Mar-2024_

## Import terms into Mondo for use in logical axioms

This workflow is for adding classes from external ontologies (i.e., GO or CHEBI), which is much more streamlined compared to [MIREOTing](https://github.com/obophenotype/human-phenotype-ontology/wiki/Editor-Guide#mireoting).

> 1. Fetch the latest changes from `master` in the "mondo" repo

Reviewer: When adding a new HGNC ID for a specific ticket, should the import refresh be done within that ticket or as a separate ticket?

Reviewer: I talked with Sabrina about this and in theory it can be done either way. Generally though, when someone needs to refresh the imports they ask on Slack if anyone else needs anything and the imports are refreshed in their own PR.

1. Create a new git feature branch
1. Open the `src/ontology/imports/manual_seed.txt` file
2. Add the IRI of the term(s) you want to add to this document and save the file
    - IRIs for any entity can be added into the `manual_seed.txt` file, e.g. gene, NCBITaxon, etc.
3. In the Terminal, run: `export "MEMORY_GB=15"`
4. Then refresh the imports: `sh run.sh make refresh-merged` 
    - All the imports will be updated, which means that you might see changes in your GitHub diff in the following files:
        - `src/ontology/imports/*_terms.txt`
        - `src/ontology/imports/merged_import.owl`

>     - The terms added in the `manual_seed.txt` file will be added to the appropriate import file (e.g human genes will be added to hgnc_terms.txt; NCBITaxon will be added to ncbitaxon_terms.txt) and removed from the `manual_seed.txt` file after the import refresh has run. 

Reviewer: Why are there currently entries in the `manual_seed.txt` file on [master](https://github.com/monarch-initiative/mondo/blob/master/src/ontology/imports/manual_seed.txt) if these entries are removed after refreshing the imports?

Reviewer 2: Indeed, I dont think that is the case. 

```suggestion
    - The terms added in the `manual_seed.txt` file will be added to the appropriate import file (e.g human genes will be added to hgnc_terms.txt; NCBITaxon will be added to ncbitaxon_terms.txt). After the import is refreshed and the term used in at least one axiom, the term can safely be removed from `manual_seed.txt`. 
```

Reviewer: It was not 100% clear the suggestion fits with the curation workflow, so for now it is not included and this last sentence removed from the docs: `After the import is refreshed and the term used in at least one axiom, the term can safely be removed from `manual_seed.txt`. `

These workflows for adding classes from external ontologies (i.e., GO or CHEBI), which is much more streamlined compared to [MIREOTing](https://github.com/obophenotype/human-phenotype-ontology/wiki/Editor-Guide#mireoting).

_Last updated 27-Mar-2024_
### Preferred Instructions

1. Open the `src/ontology/imports/manual_seed.txt`
2. Add the IRI of the term(s) you want to add to this document, and save
    - you can add any IRI, e.g. gene, NCBITaxon,...
3. In the Terminal, run: `export "MEMORY_GB=15"`
4. Then run import: `sh run.sh make refresh-merged` 
    - All the imports will be updated, which means that you might see changes in your GitHub diff in the following files
        - `src/ontology/imports/*_terms.txt`
        - `src/ontology/imports/merged_import.owl`

>     - The terms added in the "manual_seed.txt" will be added to the appropriate import (e.g human genes will be added to hgnc_terms.txt; NCBITaxon will be added to ncbitaxom_terms.txt), and removed from the "manual_seed.txt" after the import refresh has run. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - The terms added in the "manual_seed.txt" will be added to the appropriate import (e.g human genes will be added to hgnc_terms.txt; NCBITaxon will be added to ncbitaxon_terms.txt), and removed from the "manual_seed.txt" after the import refresh has run. 
```

> 5. Edit in Protege, the new terms should be available for logical definitions.

Reviewer: Does `NORM` need to be run as part of this process?

Reviewer: Ok, I guess if step 5 "Edit in Protege" is always done after running the import then the following Save in Protege of the updates to add the logical definitions will take care of any issues. I wasn't sure if someone might refresh the imports, but not edit in Protege immediately afterwards.

**Note when adding a new NCBITaxon**
Check if the new NCBI Taxon identifier(s) exist in [https://github.com/obophenotype/ncbitaxon/blob/master/subsets/taxon-subset-ids.txt](https://github.com/obophenotype/ncbitaxon/blob/master/subsets/taxon-subset-ids.txt). 
    - if the identifiers are not in the file, create a PR in this repo to include the new identifiers
    Note: this file contains CURIEs (not IRIs) so the identifier should be added in this format `NCBITaxon:1`

This additional step is needed since we are not using NCBI Taxon directly, but the OBO slim, and this file is the seed of the NCBITaxon slim.
 

> ### Alternate instructions

Author: @matentzn can you please confirm that these alternate instructions are ok?

Author: Note that when I tested, running the import "sh run.sh make refresh-merged" did not bring the information for NCBITaxon. So there might be more to do?

Reviewer 2: No, I cant think of a reason why it should not work! You will need to ask Trish for help

Reviewer: yeah, there was a ticket for the one taxon that was not added but i can't find that ticket now.

Reviewer: @sabrinatoro can you point me to that ticket?

Reviewer 3: I think this is what you are thinking of: https://github.com/monarch-initiative/mondo/issues/7343

Author: Here it is https://github.com/monarch-initiative/mondo/issues/7453.
But I don't think it will be useful, especially since I used this updated workflow and successfully added it ([PR](https://github.com/monarch-initiative/mondo/pull/7490) is awaiting for review)

Reviewer: yep, found that and reviewed/merged. 

Are the "Detailed instructions for adding..." sections still needed?

#### Add classes from external ontologies using a Text Editor

1. Close Protege
1. Checkout master
1. Create a new branch
1. Open mondo-edit.obo with a text editor like Sublime or TextEdit
1. Add axiom in mondo-edit.obo *text file*
1. **For example:**  relationship: disease_has_basis_in_dysfunction_of http://identifiers.org/hgnc/129
1. Save text file
1. open mondo-edit.obo in Protege
1. File -> save as (obo format, save as mondo-edit.obo)
1. Replace existing file  
1. Check diff

> 1. Commit/Push

Reviewer 2: Haha make a comment that the above should be used only by super experienced curators.. This is a bit of a "do it if you dare but dont document it" sort of thing, but ok

Reviewer: I am fine with removing this, but as I mentioned below in the section "Add classes from external ontologies using Protege" rather than have this as a step-by-step guide I would suggest to add some text why using a Text Editor should not be used so it is very clear the only way this information should ever be added is by following what is currently labeled as the "Preferred Instructions"... which should also be re-named as these other sections are removed.

#### Add classes from external ontologies using Protege

1. Select 'owl:Thing'
1. Add a new class
paste the full iri in the 'Name:' field, for example, http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/CHEBI_50906.
1. hit 'OK'
1. Now you can use this term, for example to construct logical axioms. The next time the imports are refreshed, the metadata (labels, definitions, etc) for this term is imported from the respective external source ontology and becomes visible in mondo-edit.obo.

> 1. See instructions on how to remake the imports file [here](../developer-guide/imports.md).

Reviewer 2: This approach will result in having annoying class declarations in mondo-edit.obo which need to be cleaned out

Author: I am fine with removing it

Reviewer: Rather than have this as a step-by-step guide how to do this using Protege, maybe change to something like:
```
While classes from external ontologies can be added directly using Protege, this process is unacceptable because it results in having class declarations in mondo-edit.obo which require further work to be cleaned out.
```

That way if someone is thinking of other alternatives they may prefer based on their knowledge, they will also know that this method does not fit with the editing workflow and why.

---

> **_update from March 27, 2024: the following is not correct anymore, and will be removed from the documentation soon_**

Author: I don't know how to strike through (I could only do one line at a time). 
I will remove the following once I have confirmation and the documentation is correct. 
Note: I tested and they worked for me... but so did the instructions below

Author: That unfortunately did not work for a whole block of text.

These workflows for adding classes from external ontologies (i.e., GO or CHEBI), which is much more streamlined compared to [MIREOTing](https://github.com/obophenotype/human-phenotype-ontology/wiki/Editor-Guide#mireoting).

_Last updated 27-Mar-2024_

> 1. Open the `src/ontology/imports/manual_seed.txt`

Author: In my mind, someone following these instructions should know they should fetch from master, create a branch, and then push to a branch. 
I know we have these basic steps in some other instructions, and therefore we are inconsistent in adding these or not. 
I don't know that it is needed, but I can be convinced otherwise. 
@nicolevasilevsky, do you have an opinion on this?

> 1. Open the `src/ontology/imports/manual_seed.txt`

Reviewer 3: I personally like it when instructions are really explicit like this, especially when I am new to something (or for other new curators), so I am in favor of including it

2. Add the IRI of the term(s) you want to add to this document, and save
    - you can add any IRI, e.g. gene, NCBITaxon,...
3. In the Terminal, run: `export "MEMORY_GB=15"`
4. Then run import: `sh run.sh make refresh-merged` 
    - All the imports will be updated, which means that you might see changes in your GitHub diff in the following files
        - `src/ontology/imports/*_terms.txt`
        - `src/ontology/imports/merged_import.owl`
    - The terms added in the "manual_seed.txt" will be added to the appropriate import (e.g human genes will be added to hgnc_terms.txt; NCBITaxon will be added to ncbitaxon_terms.txt), and removed from the "manual_seed.txt" after the import refresh has run. 
5. Open mondo-edit.obo in protege, and save the ontology (as .obo).

>     - one needs to save the mondo-edit.obo in order for the updates from the import updates (e.g. updated names) to be visible in this file. 

Author: "this file" = in the mondo-edit.obo

>     - one needs to save the mondo-edit.obo in order for the updates from the import updates (e.g. updated names) to be visible in this file. 

Reviewer: I generally try to avoid using demonstrative pronouns (this, that, these, etc.) in documentation to be explicit what "this" is since in general people can have a tendency to refer back to other things earlier in instructions and not just the thing/noun that was on that line.

    - The new terms should be available for logical definitions in Protege. Therefore one can also edit the file too, but changes not manually made could be expected (see previous comment)

**Note when adding a new NCBITaxon**
Check if the new NCBI Taxon identifier(s) exist in [https://github.com/obophenotype/ncbitaxon/blob/master/subsets/taxon-subset-ids.txt](https://github.com/obophenotype/ncbitaxon/blob/master/subsets/taxon-subset-ids.txt). 
    - if the identifiers are not in the file, create a PR in this repo to include the new identifiers
    Note: this file contains CURIEs (not IRIs) so the identifier should be added in this format `NCBITaxon:1`

This additional step is needed since we are not using NCBI Taxon directly, but the OBO slim, and this file is the seed of the NCBITaxon slim.
 

### Alternate approaches
These alternate approaches are mentioned here for documentation purposes. These should **only be used by experienced curators**, and followed by a clean-up of class declarations in mondo-edit.obo 

- **Add the required axiom, using classes from external ontologies, the in mondo-edit.obo *text file* using a Text Editor**

>  For example:  relationship: disease_has_basis_in_dysfunction_of http://identifiers.org/hgnc/129

Reviewer: If an experienced curator follows this method correctly, does making this change in the Text Editor work and not cause any further downstream issues? I'm unclear about Line 31 "and followed by a clean-up of class declarations in mondo-edit.obo", which sounds like both of these alternative approaches are fine, but just need some extra work.

Author: I do not know what type of clean-up will be needed. My understanding is that it will be updated after the next import, but I don't know if there is anything else.

Reviewer: Ok, my impression was that there wasn't really a way to do the clean-up. @matentzn what is the situation here?

Reviewer: In earlier comments, there was a decision to remove the "alternate approaches" section.

- **Add classes from external ontologies using Protege.**

> These classes should be added as new classses under 'owl:Thing', using the full IRI in the 'Name:' field, for example, http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/CHEBI_50906.

Reviewer: was this intended to be here?

Author: yes

Reviewer: there was a decision to remove the "alternate approaches" section

> While classes from external ontologies can be added directly using Protege, this process results in having class declarations in mondo-edit.obo and require further work to be cleaned out.

Reviewer: Unfortunately, reading this line (I know I suggested) here in isolation from Nico's comment doesn't have the impact of don't do this or at least that's what I understood his comment as.

Take 2 "...directly using Protege, this process results in having < annoying - is there a better word, extraneous?> class declarations in mondo-edit.obo and require further manual work to remove these. Therefore, it's best to follow the Preferred Instructions rather than try to make these updates using Protege."

Reviewer: the "alternate approaches" section was removed
